Feature/k8s comparison azure aws (#822)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2023-10-06-k8s-comparison-azure-aws.md

- [Comparison](#comparison)
- [Architectural components for Kubernetes setup](#architectural-components-for-kubernetes-setup)
- [How managed is the managed service?](#how-managed-is-the-managed-service)
- [Out of the box support](#out-of-the-box-support)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

# Introduction

Kubernetes has been the de-facto standard for cloud-native container orchestration for some years now.
Organizations that rely on a microservices architecture, often rely on Kubernetes to be their platform to deploy to. 
One of the biggest selling points, especially in recent years, is that Kubernetes can provide a very similar user experience for developers across different on-premise and cloud environments.
It can provide a common abstraction from the underlying infrastructure through its API. 
This also allows solutions built on top of Kubernetes to be easily portable across different environments.
Or at least, that's the promise that is being made by Kubernetes platform teams across the industry.

Running Kubernetes yourself can be very hard to do properly.
Managing all the moving parts, especially when the workloads are changing frequently can be challenging, to say the least.

> Mix in the usage of more advanced features like a service mesh, custom operators or multi-cloud cluster and it can become a real challenge to maintain.

Reviewer: Misschien ergens vermelden hier waarom het zo moeilijk is om Kubernetes zelf te managen? mss een eigen ervaring of hypothetisch scenario?

All hyper-scale (and more and more smaller scale) cloud providers have managed Kubernetes offerings for customers who want to leverage the power of Kubernetes, but don't want the hassle of managing all the different pieces of the solution. 
Google has its Google Kubernetes Engine, GKE for short, Azure has its Azure Kubernetes Service, AKS, and lastly, Amazon has its Elastic Kubernetes Service, EKS for short. 
Although all of these services deliver a Kubernetes cluster, they aren't all created equally as will become clear further in this blog post.

For most deployments of Kubernetes, Kubernetes itself is only part of the software stack of a software project. 
A plethora of extensions, add-ons and so-called operators are used to extend the default functionality and integrate external services into Kubernetes for easier management of those resources. 
Some common examples are the `external-dns` operator, `certmanager` and the `cluster auto scaler` projects. 

> These all add additional functionality, DNS management, Certificate Management and auto-scaling capabilities respectively, to the cluster. 

Reviewer: Horizontaal pods scalen wordt gedaan met metrics-server, mss hier ook vermelden?

Author: HPA is niet echt een operator maar meer een "native" feature toch? Ik wil hier maar aantonen dat operators de functionaliteit van een cluster kunnen extenden.

Reviewer: > HPA is niet echt een operator maar meer een "native" feature toch? Ik wil hier maar aantonen dat operators de functionaliteit van een cluster kunnen extenden.

Daar volg ik je in, cava!

> These all add additional functionality, DNS management, Certificate Management and auto-scaling capabilities respectively, to the cluster. 

Reviewer: Ik zou dit precies ook anders verwoorden, er klopt iets niet met die zin.
```suggestion
Each of these components extends a cluster's functionality by providing DNS management, certificate management, and auto-scaling capabilities, respectively.
```

This blog post aims to provide a comparison from a practical, end-user perspective when installing all the bells and whistles needed to use the platform to host all required components to build and run a web application in a cloud-native way. 

# The use case

This section will go into detail about the software stack used for the comparison and how that stack was selected. 
If you're just interested in the comparison, feel free to skip this section.

The platform used in the comparison is based on a real-world use case for a customer in the financial services sector. 
They operate the platform to build and host their core application, a microservices architecture consisting of 35+ services including third-party services like Apache Kafka, PostgreSQL and Elasticsearch just to name a few. 

The design principles can be summarized into the following:

- The main deployable artifact is a (Docker) container image
- Provide a uniform experience to the developers, regardless of the underlying cloud provider
- Automate as much as possible
- Use managed services where possible and integrate them into the Kubernetes cluster
- Reduce maintenance efforts where possible

> - Buy before build, prioritize Free Open Source Software (FOSS) from the Cloud-Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) over Commercial Of The Shelf (COTS) solutions.

Reviewer: Misschien een linkje naar CNCF toevoegen? :)

> - Buy before build, prioritize Free Open Source Software (FOSS) from the Cloud-Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) over Commercial Of The Shelf (COTS) solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Buy before build, prioritize Free Open Source Software (FOSS) from the Cloud-Native Computing Foundation ([CNCF](https://www.cncf.io/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}) over Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) solutions.
```

This has led to the following architecture: 

> - Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) for the cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
- Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) for the cluster
```

> - Azure Key Vault for secrets, keys and certificate management and storage.

Reviewer: In sommige bullet points gebruik je een punt op het einde en bij sommige niet

> - Azure Key Vault for secrets, keys and certificate management and storage.

Author: ```suggestion
- Azure Key Vault for secrets, keys and certificate management and storage
```

This comparison will only consider AWS and Azure cloud platforms.

# Comparison

This post will provide a high-level comparison between the two cloud providers AWS and Azure. 
The stack that was described above will be deployed to both clouds according to the design principles. 
In line with the design principles, choices were made to integrate with different managed services, as long as the same developer experience in the cluster is maintained. 

## Architectural components for Kubernetes setup

From an architectural perspective, both setups are very similar and highly specific to the cloud of choice at the same time.

Let's start with the Kubernetes control plane. 
This is very similar for both AWS and Azure as these are both fully managed services that are deployed and maintained by the provider.
In both cases, no access to the actual control plane nodes is available, nor are they even visible. 
The etcd is not exposed to the customer in either of the provider's managed services. 
They both support public (default) and private control plane deployments. 

> W.r.t. the data plane, the setups are similar as well. 

Reviewer: Misschien voluit schrijven? Bij het begin van een zin vind ik het er nogal raar uitzien

> W.r.t. the data plane, the setups are similar as well. 

Author: ```suggestion
With regards to the data plane, the setups are similar as well. 
```

It's no wonder that it's also a key feature for the managed Kubernetes offerings for the different cloud providers.
Both AWS and Azure support using the standard Kubernetes autoscaler project to automatically provision and destroy the additional capacity for the data plane.
However, their support and documentation are significantly different. 

Enabling autoscaling on AKS is as easy as enabling the option during cluster creation.
When adding the default (or any other) nodepool, the autoscaling option can be enabled. 
This option will make sure that all required components, resources and configurations are created to support autoscaling of the data plane nodes.
This includes installing the cluster auto scaler component into the cluster and setting up the required roles and rights for it to manage the node pool(s).
The [Azure AKS documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/cluster-autoscaler){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} shows how it can be enabled.
There is some configuration possible, but the cluster auto-scaling configuration will be managed by Azure and isn't available to the user to change.

> On EKS, the journey is a bit more hands-on.

Reviewer: Misschien hier ook iets van Fargate vermelden? Not sure

Author: Dit haal ik al aan ter hoogte van de intro 

`AWS has the option to not run directly on top of EC2 instances, but use AWS Fargate instead. `

[AWS EKS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/autoscaling.html){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} lists two default options to enable auto-scaling of the data plane nodes: Karpenter and cluster auto scaler. 
Enabling these options is completely up to the infrastructure maintainer and the resources required to enable the integration need to be deployed by the infrastructure maintainer, it's not a single "add-on" that can be enabled.
Installing the cluster auto scaler into EKS required setting up an IAM role for the auto scaler to access the AWS EC2 Auto Scaling Groups, a deployment of the cluster auto scaler itself into the cluster and making sure it's configured correctly to update the correct cluster (some auto-discovery is possible). 
There are Helm charts, Terraform modules and good documentation available to set all of it up easily. 
The advantage of this approach is that it's highly configurable, but it's more work to configure.

### Persistent Storage

> This blog post won't go into the discussion of whether running stateful workloads on Kubernetes is a good or bad idea.

Reviewer: 😄

On AKS, all volumes, both persistent volumes and data plane node root volumes are encrypted by [default using Microsoft-managed keys](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disk-encryption){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.
AKS supports customer-provided keys through the usage of a Disk Encryption Set backed by an Azure Key Vault key. 
Enabling root volume encryption can be configured in the cluster configuration by providing the required references to the disk encryption set.
To encrypt persistent volumes automatically using a customer-provided key, [the storage class can be adapted](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/azure-disk-customer-managed-keys#encrypt-your-aks-cluster-data-disk){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.
This means that all disks created using that storage class will have the same encryption key associated with it.

### Miscellaneous

The following topics are very similar across both services or don't have a fundamental impact on the experience, but are included for completeness. 

Supported by both services: 

- Public and Private API endpoints
- Egress networking

> - Custom networking: Azure CNI, AWS CNI. For the use case, (standard) kubenet is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Custom networking: Azure CNI, AWS VPC CNI. For the use case, (standard) kubenet is used.
```

- Usage of reserved and spot instances
- Creation of load balancers and public endpoints based on Kubernetes (Service) objects.
- Managed control plane upgrades
- Managed node pool upgrades

Unique on AWS:

> - AWS provided EKS module

Reviewer: Misschien hier ook eksctl vermelden? Tenzij je enkel IaC wilt.

Author: Ik zou eksctl zelf nooit aanbevelen. Dus ik zou het liever eruit laten.

- Self-managed node pools

Unique on Azure:

- Azure Files integration (Storage account integration)
- Different tier clusters (SLA backed)
- Automated periodic cluster upgrades

[AWS EKS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-add-ons.html){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} and [Azure AKS](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/integrations){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} both provide a set of add-ons on top of their standard Kubernetes offering. 
Both add-on lists are focused on integrating their own services into the cluster. 
A few add-ons worth investigating are AWS Distro for OpenTelemetry (EKS), Open Service Mesh (AKS) and KEDA (AKS).

# Conclusion

The out-of-the-box experience for both services is quite different but in line with the general experience on the platforms. 

AWS's EKS implementation feels focused on providing the right building blocks to create a great platform. 
It supports a high level of customization and provides many integration points with other AWS services. 
The integration with Key Management Service for the encryption of disks is a good example. 

> The fact that they automatically rotate the keys makes it so operators can configure this once and forget about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fact that they automatically rotate the keys makes it so that operators can configure this once and forget about it.
```
